Panama leaks spur global investigations
How assets are hidden and taxes dodged
The Panama legal firm at the heart of a massive data leak kept clients who were subject to international sanctions, documents show.
Mossack Fonseca worked with 33 individuals or companies who have been placed under sanctions by the US Treasury, including companies based in Iran, Zimbabwe and North Korea.
One had links to North Korea's nuclear weapons programme.
The information comes from the leak of 11m of the company's internal files.
Mossack Fonseca registers companies as offshore entities operated under its own name. This meant the identities of the real owners were hard to trace because they were kept out of public documents.
Live: Panama Papers reaction
All you need to know about the Panama Papers
Some of the businesses were registered before international sanctions were imposed. But in several cases Mossack Fonseca continued to act as a proxy for them after they were blacklisted.
DCB Finance was established in 2006, with its owners and directors based in North Korea's capital Pyongyang. It was later put under sanctions by the US Treasury for raising funds for the North Korean regime and being linked to a bank helping to fund the regime's nuclear weapons programme.
This picture taken by North Korea's official Korean Central News Agency (KCNA) on 12 December 2012 shows North Korean rocket Unha-3, carrying the satellite Kwangmyongsong-3, lifting off from the launching pad in Cholsan county, North Pyongan province in North KoreaImage copyrightAFP
Image caption
Pyongyang is believed to have used satellite launches to test long range missile technology
The leaked files reveal the owners of DCB Finance were a North Korean official, Kim Chol Sam and Nigel Cowie, a British banker who was also CEO of the sanctioned Daedong Credit Bank.
Mossack Fonseca appears to have overlooked that the owners and directors of the company were based in Pyongyang until it was contacted by the British Virgin Islands (BVI) authorities in 2010, inquiring about another company Mossack Fonseca had set up with directors in North Korea.
Mossack Fonseca resigned as agents for DCB Finance in September 2010.
Panama Papers - read more from BBC News
View of a sign outside the building where Panama-based Mossack Fonseca law firm offices are in Panama City (4 April 2016)Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
Law firm Mossack Fonseca is based in Panama City
Q&A on Panama Papers
David Cameron's father was a Mossack Fonseca client.
Iceland's PM refuses to resign
China leaders' relatives named in leaks
Putin associates linked to 'money laundering'
Pakistan PM Nawaz Sharif's son defends offshore companies
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko says he has done nothing wrong
Australia's tax office says it is investigating 800 individuals named in the leaks
How a 90-year-old Briton covered for a US millionaire
World media reaction: How Moscow and Beijing reported Panama
Panama Papers - Monday's developments
In 2013 the BVI authorities contacted Mossack Fonseca again, asking what checks they had carried out before opening DCB Finance in 2006.
An email from Mossack Fonseca's compliance department on 9 August 2013 says: "We have not yet addressed the reason we maintained a relationship with DCB Finance when we knew or ought to have known from incorporation in 2006, that the country, North Korea was on the black list."
North Korean leader Kim Jong Un saluting during a visit to the Ministry of the PeopleImage copyrightReuters
Image caption
North Korean leader Kim Jong Un has repeatedly threatened the US
It adds: "We should have identified from the onset that this was a high risk company."
Mr Cowie was not placed under sanctions. He has said that DCB Finance was established for legitimate business purposes and that he was "unaware, whether directly or indirectly, of any transactions being made with any sanctioned organisation or for any sanctioned purpose, during my entire tenure".
Assad's cousin
Another case involves Rami Makhlouf, who is the cousin of Syria's President Bashar al-Assad and has reported wealth of $5bn.
In 2008 the US Treasury imposed sanctions on him because it deemed him to be a "regime insider" and someone who "manipulated the Syrian judicial system and used Syrian intelligence officials to intimidate his business rivals".
Rami MakhloufImage copyrightSTR
Image caption
Rami Makhlouf is one of Syria's wealthiest businessmen
Mossack Fonseca continued to front six businesses - including one company called Drex Technologies - for Mr Makhlouf after the restrictions were put in place.
The files also show the Swiss branch of HSBC provided financial services for the firm.
In 2010, two years after the sanctions were imposed, HSBC wrote to Mossack Fonseca saying it believed Drex Technologies was a company of "good standing".
An internal email from Mossack Fonseca's compliance department also suggests HSBC staff dealing with Drex Technologies knew who Rami Makhlouf was.
The email, dated 17 February 2011, says: "We have contacted HSBC who stated that they are very aware of the fact that Mr Makhlouf is the cousin of the President of Syria.
"The HSBC compliance department of the bank not only in Geneva but also in their headquarters in London know about Mr Makhlouf and confirm that they are comfortable with him."
Bashar al - AssadImage copyrightReuters
Image caption
Mossack Fonseca operated front companies for Bashar al-Assad's cousin
HSBC said: "We work closely with the authorities to fight financial crime and implement sanctions. Our policy is clear that offshore accounts can only remain open either where clients have been thoroughly vetted where authorities ask us to maintain an account for the purposes of monitoring activity, or where an account has been frozen based on sanctions obligations."
War fuel
Mossack Fonseca cut all its links with Rami Makhlouf in September 2011, nine months after it was first recommended.
But the leaked documents reveal the firm also provided business services to another company that was registered on a US sanctions list in 2014.
The company is called Pangates International Corporation Limited. The US Treasury Department believes it supplied aviation fuel to the Syrian government to fly military aircraft during the current civil war. The files show Mossack Fonseca first incorporated the petroleum firm in 1999.
Airstrike by forces loyal to Syrian President Bashar Assad targeted Deir al-Asafir district southeast of Damascus on 31 March, leaving at least 30 people killedImage copyrightEPA
Image caption
Thousands of Syrians have died in bombing by government aircraft
Nine months after the sanctions came into effect, it was still handling the paperwork for Pangates International Corporation and certified it was a company in the Seychelles of good standing.
It was not until August 2015 that Mossack Fonseca acknowledged the company was on a blacklist and reported it to financial regulators in the Seychelles.
Mossack Fonseca said: "We have never knowingly allowed the use of our companies by individuals having any relationship with North Korea or Syria. We have our own procedures in place to identify such individuals, to the extent it is reasonably possible."
Panama's President Juan Carlos Varela told the BBC his country was willing to contribute to any investigation in any country relating to the documents.
"We are an open country," he said.
Panama Papers - tax havens of the rich and powerful exposed
Eleven million documents held by the Panama-based law firm Mossack Fonseca have been passed to German newspaper Sueddeutsche Zeitung, which then shared them with the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists. BBC Panorama and UK newspaper The Guardian are among 107 media organisations in 76 countries which have been analysing the documents. The BBC does not know the identity of the source
They show how the company has helped clients launder money, dodge sanctions and evade tax
Mossack Fonseca says it has operated beyond reproach for 40 years and never been accused or charged with criminal wrong-doing
Tricks of the trade: How assets are hidden and taxes evaded
Panama Papers: Full coverage; follow reaction on Twitter using #PanamaPapers; in the BBC News app, follow the tag "Panama Papers"
Watch Panorama on the BBC iPlayer (UK viewers only)
Related Topics
Syrian civil warBanking
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Twitter
Linkedin
Panama Papers
Panama tax leak reaction
4 April 2016
Q&A: Panama Papers
5 April 2016
Panama leaks spur global investigations
4 April 2016
How assets are hidden and taxes dodged
3 April 2016
Video
Video What the Panama Papers reveal
3 April 2016
Video How the rich and powerful hide wealth
3 April 2016
Main stories
Leaks name Chinese leaders' relatives
4 April 2016
Iceland PM refuses to resign after leak
4 April 2016
Putin friend in 'money laundering ring'
3 April 2016
Ukraine president denies tax claims
4 April 2016
PM's father was Mossack Fonseca client
4 April 2016
Sharif's son defends offshore companies
4 April 2016
Fifa ethics lawyer Damiani investigated
3 April 2016
The 90-year-old Brit and the US millionaire
4 April 2016
Related Internet links
The Guardian - Panama Papers
Sueddeutsche Zeitung - Panama Papers
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
World
Kenya's Deputy President William Ruto at the ICC (September 2013)
ICC to deliver key war crimes ruling
5 April 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article ICC to deliver key war crimes ruling
Former New Zealand Prime Minister Helen Clark (04 April 2016)
Ex-NZ PM Clark to run for UN top job
5 April 2016
 From the section Asia
Full article Ex-NZ PM Clark to run for UN top job
Guantanamo Bay prison
Guantanamo pair moved to Senegal
4 April 2016
 From the section US & Canada
Full article Guantanamo pair moved to Senegal
World live reporting
LIVE Panama papers reaction
34 minutes ago
Icelanders push to remove PM
Full article Panama papers reaction
Top Stories
Sanctioned clients on Panama firm's books
4 April 2016
ICC to deliver key war crimes ruling
5 hours ago
Ex-NZ PM Clark to run for UN top job
9 hours ago
Features & Analysis
Nancy and Charlie McLean's son Edison was born with a rare metabolic condition
Little fighter
Photos of dying newborn shine light on rare disorder
 Masood Azhar
Extremist on tour
The man who brought jihad to Britain in 1993
 Cleaning the Drapes from House Beautiful: Bringing the War Home, 1967-1972, printed 2007
An Altering Eye
Images from Washington's National Gallery of Art
 Wallaby on King Island
Slaughter island
Meet the man who shoots 30,000 wallabies a year
 Binod Lahot
Dirty and dangerous
India’s sewer workers putting their lives at risk
 Cowboy silhouette
Taming the west
A new threat to the traditional American cowboy?
 A community council meeting in Venezuela
A good idea going bad?
Grassroots democracy meets party power in Venezuela
 Sparsh Shah
Internet inspiration
The 12-year-old whose Eminem cover has been seen by millions
 Delhi resident VIDEO
Delhi discussions
Crowd-sourced story ideas from India
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
Sanctioned clients on Panama firm's books
2
Vitamin D 'heals damaged hearts'
3
Panama papers reaction
4
Baby Edison's short life shines light on rare disorder
5
Two planes collide at Jakarta airport
6
Gloves come off for Clinton and Sanders
7
Admiral Ackbar voice actor dies at 93
8
The Eminem cover inspiring millions online
9
The man who brought jihad to Britain in 1993
10
Q&A: Panama Papers
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.